hw 3

based off of example 4

CSCI4239/5239 Spring 2026

changing mode (pressing m) changes which test is being performed. The specific test will be noted on the bottom of the screen.

Key bindings
  m          Toggle mode
  o          Change objects
  s			 toggle light movement
  arrows     Change view angle
  PgDn/PgUp  Zoom in and out
  0          Reset view angle
  ESC        Exit

  time spent: 7 hours

  Results:
Integer vs Float for color:
For both representations the FPS is generally within the range 4800-5000 FPS. There is not much difference with this one, it's the kind of thing the compiler is good at fixing.

If statement in color:
Now the FPS is hanging around the same 4800-5000 FPS range. It looks like one if statement is not enough to impact the scene.

Crash and Burn: Each second draw another cube.
The framerate quickly deteriorates as more polygons are added to the scene. It drops by about 100 frame every 5 seconds. 

Burn and Crash: each second draw one less cube, starts with full screen from above definition
Frame rate quickly increases as cubes are deleted. It increases at a similar rate to how Crash and Burn was decreasing.

Transcendental Color: use sin(vertex position) to calculate the color of a vertex
This doesn't seem to have a big impact on FPS. It was hanging around the 4700 range.

Spin: rotate the object based on time
This doesn't seem to have a big impact on FPS. This makes sense because we are just doing a simple calculation to determine vertex position before drawing.

InLine vs Function: a shader that calculates color as a function of vertex position, to the power of 10. In line uses vertex.x * vertex.x .... and function uses pow(vertex.x, 10)
This is another one where there is not much difference.

Summary:
I think my methods of evaluation were flawed, it takes a lot more than the limited changes I was making in most tests to effect graphics card performance. 
The exception was Crash and Burn, and Burn and Crash, where there are a large number of polygons being created/destroyed. 
My other tests needed to use similarly large examples to show their effects.


